We are hopefully really excited to dig
into these pure functions or are they?
Or are they?
That's what we're gonna be finding out.
So hopefully everybody had a chance
to go through this notebook.
And if anyone is again having any issues
with accessing the course materials on
observable, they should work.
It should work in all browsers and
whatnot.
But if anyone is having struggles,
please let us know.
So let's talk about these pure functions,
shall we?
Okay, we're gonna go through these
one by one and just make sure that
if there's any questions about why
we labeled it as pure or not pure.
Or any asterisks or what if sir,
those kind of questions that we
have a chance to go through them.
So let's just take a few minutes to
go through each of these functions.
All right, this get date function.
What do we think and
folks can shout it out pure or not?
>> Not.
>> I heard it not, nodding I see
nodding so it sounds like everybody
thinks it is not pure has a high five
raise hands, it is indeed not pure.
Can anybody recap without looking
at the explanation right now,
why this is not pure function, get date.
>> I thought it was pure originally.
>> Okay.
>> Everytime you call it,
you get a new date.
>> Everytime you call
it you get a new date.
Is that what someone else had unmuted
is that what a someone else's was
about to say?
>> Actually the date is
a part of the outside world.
It's not an argument.
So that is why.
Otherwise we always give new arguments.
So those are also new.
Is a part of the outside world.
It's not an argument.
>> The date is a part
of the outside world.
So we are asking something
about the outside world here.
And yes, so when we call this different
times like on different days, let's say if
we call this tomorrow or in a week or in
a year, assuming we get to 2021 [LAUGH].
If we call this multiple times at
different times when the data has changed
because that is something
about the outside world,
we will get a different result.
So we can't be guaranteed
that this is deterministic,
we can't be guaranteed that if I call get
date with the same arguments in this case,
no arguments that I'm always
gonna get the same answer.
In fact, I'll get different things for
the return value.
So yes, we have kind of a little
bit of an interaction here.
The question was is it not
the constructor of the data object
that's MPR as opposed to
the function get date itself.
And so again, this is one of those cases
where we need to know something about
the functions that we're calling within
our functions and their purity, right?
So this date, when I construct a new date,
like this like we do in get date.
I have an impure function because
I can call that multiple times on
different days and
still get different answers.
So yes, there is introducing
impurity into our function.
There, because this
function is not super pure.
So let's contrast this I think it'll it'll
bring a few things about get date to
light here.
If we look at get workshop date.
We'll leave that one up there too.
What about get workshop date?
What do we think pure or not?
>> Pure.
>> I heard pure.
>> Pure, pure.
Lets try pure.
Woo hoo.
So what's the difference between
get workshop date and get date?
So yes, this get workshop date
function is deterministic,
it always gives the same result.
If I call it tomorrow, if I call it
in a year, if I call it in 10 years,
assuming JavaScript hasn't
changed dramatically since then,
I should get the same result.
And again, there is a little bit of
interaction here going on with this date,
the capital D date in JavaScript because
we need to know something about that and
what it's gonna what its
behavior is gonna be.
But the way that date constructor
works if I pass in these arguments,
I'm always gonna get back the same date.
And that's gonna give me
the same date string.
So this get workshop date function
even though it takes no inputs.
It's always going to give me the same
output regardless of when I call it.
So it is deterministic.
I always know what this function
is gonna return if I call it
with the same arguments,
no arguments in this case.
Okay, moving on.
How about this two hex function?
Pure or not?
I heard pure, I'm seeing nods for
pure, Woo hoo, this is pure.
Again we've got a function which depends
on essentially only its input arguments.
We are using some built in
JavaScript features here,
like some of these string methods but
those also are not going to introduce
impurity into this function.
So we're always gonna have a predictable
deterministic output, yeah.
So the question is if I have
a function that's taking in an array.
And returning a random element from that
array, is that a pure or impure function?
No, I'm gonna return that
right back over to the room.
What if folks think pure or not, if I'm
returning a randomly selected element?
>> Up here, the random number
generator is a side effects.
>> I heard not pure the random
number generator is a side effect.
So, what do we know about randomness?
It is not deterministic, right?
That is it's kind of
the opposite of deterministic.
If a deterministic thing is something
that we know what its answer is gonna be,
then a random thing is something
that we have no idea or
maybe we have some idea
probabilistically but we can't be sure.
So randomness is a side effect.
Randomness is not functional
randomness is not deterministic.
And so randomness is another one of those
things where when we're working with
randomness, we need to think about it as
a side effect and is one of those world
affecting operations that we kind of
pushed to the edges of our program.
So working with the randomness and
functional programming is a whole topic
that's a big can of worms that is
certainly super interesting to dive
into but for suffice it to say that in
the code that we're gonna be writing
today to really wrap our heads
around functional programming.
We're gonna be doubling
down on determinism and
we're gonna be avoiding
things like randomness.
So randomness would introduce
impurity in functional programming.
We want to be deterministic and
we do not want to change the outside
state of the world except for
returning a value, that is the thing
that we are concerned with
doing to the outside world is
giving it our output value back.
So yes, we want to make sure
we're being deterministic and
make sure that all that we are doing
is returning that output value.
So how about this RGB to hex
function pure not pure?
>> Pure.
>> I hear pure.
It is indeed.
So similar logic as last time with
our two hex function in this case.
However, we do we make this we
make use of this to hex function,
right which again is a little bit.
Maybe we need to think about it and
make sure that we know whether to hex
is pure and deterministic or not.
But since we already said that to
hex is deterministic it is pure.
In this case,
we're not introducing any impurity, and so
we've still got a pure function.
How about set color pure or not?
I hear not.
I hear some knots.
I hear not pure, not pure.
Whoo hoo, great work.
All right, can somebody tell me what
is not pure about this function?
>> It's not returning anything.
>> Well,
we saw one of those big red flags.
It's not returning anything.
There's no return statement.
So in JavaScript,
it's returning undefined but again,
red flag because what's important in
pure functions is what they return.
So if I don't even care enough
to put the word return in there,
I probably have a pretty good indication.
It's not a pure function.
Anything else that makes
us think it's not pure?
>> It's accessing the DOM.
>> It's accessing the DOM, yes.
So this function is setting the color
of a element from our document.
So this is a side effect.
This is something that it's doing to
the world other than returning a value,
which again, we don't even have
a return statement here so
we're not returning a value.
Instead what we're doing is
updating the world somehow.
So that is a prime example.
Color pun not intended [LAUGH]
of a impurity of a side
effect in that function.
Okay, moving on how about
read JSON file pure or
not feel like we're on a game show.
>> I think not impure.
I hear not, I see thumbs down,
I hear impure.
And it is indeed not pure.
Can somebody recap why?
>> It's fetching the data
from an outside URL,
and then,
>> It fetch,
>> It's probably it's returning.
All right, fine.
So that's why.
>> It's fetching the data
from an outside URL.
So that is something that is
coming in from the outside world
into the function, not pure.
And also, what happens if
the data at that URL changes or
maybe that resource goes away and
the fetch fails.
What happens then?
Well, we're probably gonna get
a different result [LAUGH] than
we did when it was working.
So we have non determinism as well.
So this is again, these are real
warning signs or red flags for
functions that are not pure.
Is if they're looking at something in the
outside world, then because the outside
world is always changing, we might not
have a deterministic pure function.
>> Is it also a red flag that
the file name input was never used?
That is probably also interesting
because it's actually
not operating on the file
name that was passed in.
This may also be instructor oversight but
let's imagine that file name
was that this was replaced and
I can actually do this right
in observable, what about now?
>> Impure because the file,
I mean the content of the file can change.
>> So we have a still maybe it is impure
because the content of that file could
change.
Yes so in this case,
it is looking at the input.
Unlike the previous version which
may be instructor error but
even though it's looking at that input,
it's using this fetch to find
something from the outside world.
Which might have changed,
might be different, might not be there,
might give us an error we don't know.
So again, that's why these impure
functions are less predictable and
they're harder to debug,
you'd have to really like,
make sure that you've handled
all those error cases.
They're harder to test.
And so, even though even if we're
passing in the file name anytime we're
asking the outside world for a resource or
looking outside of the function for
information, that is not pure.
>> Are all asynchronous
functions impure by definition
because you're returning a promise
that later needs to be resolved.
I think anything you're doing
asynchronously is non deterministic
because if it was deterministic,
then you wouldn't need to return
a promise in the first place.
Is that correct or am I.
>> Interesting question are all
asynchronous operations
in JavaScript impure.
Because we need to wait for
those promises to resolve.
What about a case of a really long
running calculation that perhaps
if I have some kind of like distributed
system and part of one of my processors
is doing a long calculation and
I'm waiting for that to come back.
Well, it depends again on like that
calculation and what it's doing.
So I, this is an interesting one and
asynchronicity in JavaScript
always opens up cans of worms.
And again, JavaScript itself is
not necessarily the way JavaScript
runs is not necessarily like the most
pure functional environment.
However the operation that
we're doing asynchronously,
it might not be an impure operation.
In this case,
it's grabbing something from the world.
But maybe it would just be a super long
computation that I'm waiting to complete.
And using this await,
I'm essentially pausing my function from
doing anything else until that is done.
And so if that is a deterministic
pure operation and
if my function is also being
deterministic and pure,
then I don't necessarily have any
impurity introduced into my program.
But I feel like we want to ask folks
like Kyle Simpson and Brian Lonsurf,
what they think about that question.
They are much more
Asynchronous JavaScript pros then me,
okay moving right along so
we said read Jason file was not pure.
What about write Jason string?
Pure or not?
>> Pure.
>> We should be confident if we've
already clicked all of these buttons,
all right so what makes right Jason string
pure while read Jason file is not pure.
What right Jason string is doing
is taking in an object and
outputting a string based on that
object now, Jason stringify.
We probably have to look into a little
bit make sure that we know whether
it's deterministic or
not, but in this case,
that is going to return the same string
if I was give it the same object.
However, there is a little
bit of an asterisk on this.
Can anybody think of a condition
in which this might introduce
a little bit of trickiness
to this situation?
Has to do with the object or passing in.
>> The object is an array maybe?
>> Okay, I heard maybe if
the object is an array or what if?
>> If object is changing?
>> If the object is changing, right, so
if the object is a regular JavaScript
object or regular JavaScript array,
both of those are mutable types of data.
So somebody could come along and
mess with the contents of my object.
And so then if I call this function on the
same object because it has retained its
identity but the contents of the object.
Inside have changed then I might get
a different output when I call this at
different times.
So again, this is why it's really
important in functional programming to
work with immutable
data that can't change.
And we're gonna look at how
we can do that in JavaScript,
which doesn't by default have
a lot of immutable data.
We're gonna look at that
in depth later today.
The truth table functions here
exclusive are real quick.
Let's do it pure or not.
>> Pure.
>> I heard pure, boom.
Hopefully it's clear that this will always
give me the same result because I can
depend on those logical operators
in JavaScript to always give me
the same thing if I give
them the same truth values.
All right now what about this
compute truth table where I give
it an operator and
I get out a table of all of the different
permutations for
that operator, pure or not?
>> Pure.
>> I heard pure and
I see thumbs up indeed.
Now, there's a little bit more going
on in this function than in some of
the functions that we've seen so far.
But let's think about it.
We're taking in an operator and
that is really the only thing that
the value of this result depends on.
And then we are returning that value,
which in this case
is an array of objects, and
we should get the same object no
matter how many times we call
it with the same argument.
However, there is also something about
this function that feels a little fishy.
Feels a little not functional.
Does anybody get a tingling sense, yes?
>> The operator argument could
be a function which does affect
the outside world.
>> Okay, the operator could be sneaky and
pass in a side effecting
impure function here.
That is one way that we could
introduce impurity into this function.
And so again,
that's why in pure functional languages,
you're sort of guaranteed that
all of your functions are pure.
And that's a nice guarantee
to have in JavaScript.
We don't have that guarantee.
So we have to be disciplined about it.
But yes, good point.
>> That is also that we
are mutating table inside.
>> We are also mutating table inside
of the function, great point.
So this is I've been talking
like immutable, immutable,
immutable data immutable data,
we're not doing that here.
We're pushing things into this table.
We're changing table.
So this feels a little un functional
however, since we're doing it inside of
the function and we're not communicating
with the outside world at all and
nobody else can access that table and
mess with it.
While I'm doing this computation,
we're not introducing impurity.
However, this isn't really
a functional style of writing code.
It's still pretty imperative.
Still pretty command oriented.
So in a moment we're going to look at how
we could do this in a more functional
style.
Great points.
Okay, how about show a truth table?
I think everybody is gonna,
yell and one voice.
Not pure exactly.
So, just like before,
we said console logging is not cool
console table, which is a fun fun one.
If anybody hasn't used it, try it out.
Console table is also spitting
out something to the console.
That's not pure and again,
no return statement.
Red Flag not pure function.
Okay, great job.